README.md, before:

<h2>ACS5 Scripts</h2>

*Scripts produce JSONs from ACS5 Census Data*

<u>To run:</u>

1. Obtain a Census API key [here](https://api.census.gov/data/key_signup.html)
2. Create a file called `.env` in the root directory. This file is ignored via the .gitignore file to avoid committing
   secrets.
3. Add the following to the `.env`:

```
CENSUS_KEY=REPLACE_ME_WITH_CENSUS_API_KEY
```

4. Run scripts:
    - test_jsons.py: runs all scripts and tests their output
        - Verifies scripts produce valid jsons
    - main.py: produces JSON files
        - To run with memory profiling on MacOS/Linux:
            1. Make sure the script is executable: `chmod 755 memory_profiling/run_main.sh`
            2. Run the script: `./memory_profiling/run_main.sh`
            3. View the report: `memory_profiling/memory_profile_report.txt`
        - To run with memory profiling on Windows (TODO need a Windows user to write this):
            1. Make sure the script is executable
            2. Run the script:
            3. View the report: `memory_profiling\memory_profile_report.txt`
<details>
<summary><u>ACS5 Data Tables</u></summary>

 - Detailed: https://api.census.gov/data/2018/acs/acs5?
   - "Most detailed cross-tabulations"
 - Subject: https://api.census.gov/data/2018/acs/acs5/subject?
   - "Overview of estimates available in a particular topic"
 - Data Profile: https://api.census.gov/data/2018/acs/acs5/profile?
   - "Broad social, economic, housing, and demographic information"
 - Comparison Profile: https://api.census.gov/data/2018/acs/acs5/cprofile?
   - "Similar to data profiles but include comparisons with past-year data"
</details>
JSON Format:

{'geographic area': {geo_code: {metric1_dict: {}, metric2_dict: {},...},...},...}

<hr>
<h3><u>How to use Main.py</u></h3>

- Add Census data call to script by creating new CensusData instance
    - Required Construction: CensusData(var_dict, table)
- Use the get_data method to update CensusData.df_dict
    - View dataframes: df_dict[key] (key='zip' or 'county')
- Save dataframe using CensusData.df_to_json()
    - Default saves zipped by geo_code
    - Set zip_df = False to save dataframes without processing
- Load dataframe using CensusData.load_df()
    - Default loads unzipped saved file, described above

<u>Additional Scripts</u>

**census_response.py**

*helper module for census API*

functions:

- **getCensusResponse**: creates census API query url
    - ACS5 Table URLs:
        - Detailed: https://api.census.gov/data/2018/acs/acs5/variables.html
        - Subject: https://api.census.gov/data/2018/acs/acs5/subject/variables.html
        - Data Profile: https://api.census.gov/data/2018/acs/acs5/profile/variables.html
        - Comparison Profile: https://api.census.gov/data/2018/acs/acs5/cprofile/variables.html
- **getCensusData**: obtains Census data returns as dictionary
    - Uses getCensusResponse for API call
    - By default runs for zip and county, but expandable to other geographies (not tested)
        - By default only keeps zipcodes for Illinois
- **searchTable**: searches variable tables with keyword and function filters
    - ACS5 Variable Table URLs:
        - Detailed: https://api.census.gov/data/2018/acs/acs5/variables.html
        - Subject: https://api.census.gov/data/2018/acs/acs5/subject/variables.html
        - Data Profile: https://api.census.gov/data/2018/acs/acs5/profile/variables.html
        - Comparison Profile: https://api.census.gov/data/2018/acs/acs5/cprofile/variables.html
- county_fips: returns JSON of county_name: fip (reversible)
- **processRaceData**: determines majority race and race percentages, passed into getCensusData function

**file_to_json.py**

*converts CSV and Excel files to the json format*

- County name in table MUST be in the first column or named "County Name"
- Returns list of JSON/Dictionaries to be merged

**dict_merge.py**

*Merges data dictionaries, prevents overwrite*

- Outputs to file and returns list of dictionaries
- Currently does not add missing data keys to geocodes

Commit message:

Michael/getting started (#33)
* updated requirements.txt pandas version due to 1.2 breaking error

* added start scripts and example notebook

* modified start scripts and updated readme

* added pkl to gitignore

* updated readme

* added jupyter info to readme

* added capture function

* removed unnecessary sys path code

README.md, after:

<h2>ACS5 Scripts</h2>

*Scripts produce JSONs from ACS5 Census Data*

<u>To run:</u>

1. Obtain a Census API key [here](https://api.census.gov/data/key_signup.html)
2. Create a file called `.env` in the root directory. This file is ignored via the .gitignore file to avoid committing secrets.
3. Add the following to the `.env`:

```
CENSUS_KEY=REPLACE_ME_WITH_CENSUS_API_KEY
```

4. Run scripts:
     - Install required modules in requirements.txt
         - Mac/Linux: `pip3 install -r requirements.txt`
         - Windows: `pip install -r requirements.txt`
     - For initial run:
       - On Mac/Linux: 
         - Make script executable `chmod 755 start.sh`
         - run `start.sh` via terminal or double click
       - On Windows: run `start.bat` via command line or double click
       - If tests do not pass, check `.env` or package versions
     - After environment set up, run with:
       - Mac/Linux: `python3 src/main.py`
       - Windows: `python src\main.py`
     - To run with memory profiling on MacOS/Linux:
         1. Make sure the script is executable: `chmod 755 memory_profiling/run_main.sh`
         2. Run the script: `./memory_profiling/run_main.sh`
         3. View the report: `memory_profiling/memory_profile_report.txt`
     - To run with memory profiling on Windows CMD/Powershell:
         1. Run the script: `.\memory_profiling\run_main.bat`
         2. View the report: `memory_profiling\memory_profile_report.txt`
 1. Explore Data:
      - After code runs, then you can open the dataframes in `getting_started/example.ipynb`
        - With VSCode, Python and Jupyter extensions enable opening Notebook files
        - Alternatively: getting started with [JupyterLab](https://jupyter.org/install)
<details>
<summary><u>ACS5 Data Tables</u></summary>

 - Detailed: https://api.census.gov/data/2018/acs/acs5?
   - "Most detailed cross-tabulations"
 - Subject: https://api.census.gov/data/2018/acs/acs5/subject?
   - "Overview of estimates available in a particular topic"
 - Data Profile: https://api.census.gov/data/2018/acs/acs5/profile?
   - "Broad social, economic, housing, and demographic information"
 - Comparison Profile: https://api.census.gov/data/2018/acs/acs5/cprofile?
   - "Similar to data profiles but include comparisons with past-year data"
</details>
JSON Format:

{'geographic area': {geo_code: {metric1_dict: {}, metric2_dict: {},...},...},...}

<hr>
<h3><u>How to use Main.py</u></h3>

- Add Census data call to script by creating new CensusData instance
    - Required Construction: CensusData(var_dict, table)
- Use the get_data method to update CensusData.df_dict
    - View dataframes: df_dict[key] (key='zip' or 'county')
- Save dataframe using CensusData.df_to_json()
    - Default saves zipped by geo_code
    - Set zip_df = False to save dataframes without processing
- Load dataframe using CensusData.load_df()
    - Default loads unzipped saved file, described above

<u>Additional Scripts</u>

**census_response.py**

*helper module for census API*

functions:

- **getCensusResponse**: creates census API query url
    - ACS5 Table URLs:
        - Detailed: https://api.census.gov/data/2018/acs/acs5/variables.html
        - Subject: https://api.census.gov/data/2018/acs/acs5/subject/variables.html
        - Data Profile: https://api.census.gov/data/2018/acs/acs5/profile/variables.html
        - Comparison Profile: https://api.census.gov/data/2018/acs/acs5/cprofile/variables.html
- **getCensusData**: obtains Census data returns as dictionary
    - Uses getCensusResponse for API call
    - By default runs for zip and county, but expandable to other geographies (not tested)
        - By default only keeps zipcodes for Illinois
- **searchTable**: searches variable tables with keyword and function filters
    - ACS5 Variable Table URLs:
        - Detailed: https://api.census.gov/data/2018/acs/acs5/variables.html
        - Subject: https://api.census.gov/data/2018/acs/acs5/subject/variables.html
        - Data Profile: https://api.census.gov/data/2018/acs/acs5/profile/variables.html
        - Comparison Profile: https://api.census.gov/data/2018/acs/acs5/cprofile/variables.html
- county_fips: returns JSON of county_name: fip (reversible)
- **processRaceData**: determines majority race and race percentages, passed into getCensusData function

**file_to_json.py**

*converts CSV and Excel files to the json format*

- County name in table MUST be in the first column or named "County Name"
- Returns list of JSON/Dictionaries to be merged

**dict_merge.py**

*Merges data dictionaries, prevents overwrite*

- Outputs to file and returns list of dictionaries
- Currently does not add missing data keys to geocodes
